You Are Ready for Project #4 — The Proper Way

Now I will give you one command at a time, with explanation before each. Run them in order.
Step 1: See your current environment variables

Before you run: This command shows all environment variables currently active in your terminal. You will see HOME, USER, PATH, SHELL, and many others.
bash

env

Run it. Do not post the entire output (it's long). Just tell me: What is the value of SHELL? (Look for a line starting with SHELL=)
Step 2: See one specific variable

Before you run: echo $HOME prints your home directory. The $ tells bash to replace $HOME with its value.
bash

echo $HOME

Run it. What do you see?
Step 3: Create a shell variable (not exported)

Before you run: my_color="blue" creates a variable that exists ONLY in this bash process. No child process can see it.
bash

my_color="blue"
echo "Shell variable value: $my_color"

Run it. What do you see?
Step 4: Verify Python cannot see it

Before you run: We start Python and try to print my_color. It will fail because my_color is not exported.
bash

python3 -c "import os; print(os.environ.get('my_color', 'NOT FOUND'))"

Run it. What does it print?
Step 5: Export the variable

Before you run: export my_color promotes the shell variable to an environment variable. Now child processes will inherit it.
bash

export my_color
python3 -c "import os; print(os.environ.get('my_color', 'NOT FOUND'))"

Run it. What does it print now?
Step 6: The security demonstration

Before you run: This shows why storing secrets in environment variables is dangerous. We create a secret, then use ps auxe to see it.
bash

export SECRET="password123"
ps auxe | grep SECRET

Run it. Do you see SECRET=password123 in the output?
Step 7: Clean up (remove the secret from your environment)

Before you run: unset removes the variable from the environment.
bash

unset SECRET
unset my_color
ps auxe | grep SECRET   # Should show nothing

Run it.
Your Tasks (After Running the Steps Above)

    Answer the questions embedded in Steps 1-6 (the ones that say "What do you see?")

    Write a one-sentence summary of why export is needed.

    Write a one-sentence warning about storing passwords in environment variables.

Quiz for Project #4 (After You Run the Commands)

    What is the difference between env and echo $HOME?

    If you set x=5 in bash, then run python3 -c "print(x)", what happens and why?

    What command removes an environment variable?

    Why does ps auxe show environment variables? (Think: what does the e flag stand for?)

    If you want a variable to be available to a child process, what must you do?

Mathematical Thinking Exercise (Project #4)

Problem: A system has 1,000 users. Each user has a unique environment variable called USER_SECRET with a random 4-digit PIN (0000 to 9999).

If an attacker can run ps auxe on the system, what is the probability they can see at least one user's PIN?

Step 1: Total possible PINs = 10,000 (0000 to 9999)

Step 2: Probability a specific user's PIN is guessed randomly = 1/10,000 = 0.0001

Step 3: But the attacker is not guessing — they are reading the environment variable directly with ps auxe. If they can see it, they know it with 100% certainty.

Step 4: So the question becomes: What is the probability that at least one user has a process running with their USER_SECRET exposed?

Assume: At any given time, 10% of users have a process running (100 users). Each running process exposes its environment.

Answer: If 100 users have running processes, the attacker sees 100 PINs directly. Probability is 100% (they will see them all).

Moral of the story: Environment variables are not a secret store. Anyone who can run ps auxe on the same machine can read them.
Before You Proceed

    Do you have any questions about what you just ran?

If not, run the 7 steps above, answer the embedded questions, complete the quiz, and post your results.

Then we move to Project #5 — File I/O: Reading and Writing Files (where we learn the proper way to store secrets: in files with restricted permissions).

You are building correctly now. One brick at a time.
